Riak Search, Inline Fields
==========

In this post I want to give a quick overview of _inline fields_; a
recent addition to [Riak Search] [rs] that allows you to trade-off disk
space for a considerable performance bump in query execution and
throughput.  I'm going to assume the reader is already familiar with
Search.  In the future I may do a Search overview.  If you would like
that then ping me on [twitter](http://twitter.com/#!/rzezeski).


The Goal
----------

Recently on the Riak Users mailing list there has been discussion
about improving the performance of Search when executing intersection
(i.e. `AND`) queries where one term has a low frequency and the other
has a high frequency.  This can pose a problem because Search needs to
run through all the results on both sides in order to provide the
correct result.  Therefore, the query is always bounded by the highest
frequency term.  This is exasperated further by the fact that Search
uses a _global index_, or in other words partitions the index by term.
This effectively means that all results for a particular term are
pulled sequentially from **one** node.  This is opposed to a _local
index_, or partitioning by document, which effectively allows you to
parallelize the query across all nodes.  There are trade-offs for
either method and I don't want to discuss that in this blog post.
However, it's good to keep in mind <sup>1</sup>.  My goal with this
post is to show how you can improve the performance of this type of
query with the current version of Search <sup>2</sup>.


What's an "Inline" Field, Anyways?
----------

To properly understand inline fields you need to understand the
_inverted index_ data structure <sup>3</sup>.  As a quick refresher
the gist is that the index is a map from words to a list of document
reference/weight pairs.  For each word <sup>4</sup> the index tells
you in which documents it occurs and its "weight" in relation to that
document, e.g. how many times it occurs.  Search adds a little twist
to this data structure by allowing an arbitrary list of properties to
be tacked on to each of these pairs.  For example, Search tracks the
position of each occurrence of a term in a document.

Inline fields allow you to take advantage <sup>5</sup> of this fact
and store the terms of a field directly in the inverted index entries
<sup>6</sup>.  Going back to my hypothetical query you could mark the
field with the frequently occurring term as `inline` and change the
`AND` query to a query and a _filter_.  A filter is simply an extra
argument to the Search API that uses the same syntax as a regular
query but makes use of the inline field.  This has the potential to
drop your latency dramatically as you avoid pulling all the massive
_posting_ <sup>7</sup> altogether.

**WARNING: Inline fields are not free!  Think carefully about what I
 just described and you'll realize that this list of inline terms will
 be added to every single posting for that index.  If your field
 contains many terms or you have many inline fields this could become
 costly in terms of disk space.  As always, benchmarking with real
 hardware on a real production data set is recommended.**


The Corpus
----------

I'll be using a set of ~63K [tweets] [corpus] that occurred in reaction
to the the devastating earthquake that took place in Haiti during
January of 2010.  The reason I choose this data-set is because it's
guaranteed to have frequently occurring terms such as "earthquake" but
also has low occurring terms <sup>7</sup> such as the time the tweets
were created.


The Rig
----------

All benchmarks were run on a 2GHz i7 MBP with an SSD <sup>8</sup>.  An
initial run is performed to prime all systems.  Essentially,
everything should be coming from FS cache meaning I'll mostly be
testing processing time.  My guess is disk I/O would only amplify the
results.  I'll be using Basho Bench and running it on the same machine
as my cluster.  My cluster consists of a four Riak nodes (obviously,
on the same machine) which I built from master <sup>9</sup>.

If you'd like to run the benchmarks on your own hardware please see
the [RUN_BENCHMARKS.md](riak-search-inline-fields/RUN_BENCHMARKS.md)
file.


Naive Query
----------

    "text:earthquake"

The naive query asks for every document id <sup>10</sup> that includes
the word `earthquake`.  This should return `62805` results every time.

![Naive](https://github.com/rzezeski/try-try-try/raw/master/2011/riak-search-inline-fields/results/naive.png)


Scoped Query
----------

    "text:earthquake AND created_at:[20100113T032200 TO 20100113T032500]"

The scoped query still searches for all documents with the term
`earthquake` but restricts this set further to only those that were
created in the provided three minute time span.

![Scoped](https://github.com/rzezeski/try-try-try/raw/master/2011/riak-search-inline-fields/results/scoped.png)


Scoped Query With Filtering
----------

    "created_at:[20100113T032200 TO 20100113T032500]" "text:earthquake"

This is the same as the scoped query except `earthquake` is now a
filter, not a query.  Notice, unlike the previous two queries, there
are two strings.  The first is the query the second is the filter.
You could read that in English as:

> Execute the query to find all tweets created in this three minute
> range.  Then filter that set using the inline field "text" where it
> contains the term "earthquake."

![Scoped & Filter](https://github.com/rzezeski/try-try-try/raw/master/2011/riak-search-inline-fields/results/scoped-filter.png)


Wait One Second!
----------

Just before I was about to consider this post wrapped up I realized my
comparison of inline vs. non-inline wasn't quite fair.  As currently
implemented, when returning postings the inline field's value is
included.  I'm not sure if this is of any practical use outside the
filtering mechanism but this means that in the case of the naive and
scoped queries the cluster is taking an additional disk and network
hit by carrying all that extra baggage.  A more fair comparison would
be to run the naive and scoped queries with no inline fields.  I
adjusted my scripts and did just that.

### Naive With No Inlining ###

![Naive No Inline](https://github.com/rzezeski/try-try-try/raw/master/2011/riak-search-inline-fields/results/naive-non-inline.jpg)

### Scoped With No Inlining ###

![Scoped No Inline](https://github.com/rzezeski/try-try-try/raw/master/2011/riak-search-inline-fields/results/scoped-non-inline.jpg)


Conclusions
----------

In this first table I summarize the absolute values for throughput,
99.9th percentile and average latencies.

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Stat</th>
    <th>Naive (I)</th>
    <th>Naive</th>
    <th>Scoped (I)</th>
    <th>Scoped</th>
    <th>Scoped Filter</th>
  </tr>

  <tr>
    <td>Thru (op/s)</td>
    <td>2.5</td>
    <td>3.5</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>5</td>
    <td>15</td>
  </tr>
  
  <tr>
    <td>99.9% (ms)</td>
    <td>875</td>
    <td>490</td>
    <td>575</td>
    <td>350</td>
    <td>42</td>
  </tr>
  
  <tr>
    <td>Avg (ms)</td>
    <td>800</td>
    <td>440</td>
    <td>530</td>
    <td>310</td>
    <td>25</td>
  </tr>
</table>

In this benchmark I don't care so much about the absolute numbers as I
do how they relate to each other.  In the following table I show the
performance increase of using the scoped filter query versus the other
queries.  For example, the scoped filter query has three times the
throughput and returns in 1/12th of the time, on average, as compared
to the scoped query.  That is, even its closest competitor has a
latency profile that is an order of magnitude worse.  You may find it
odd that I included the naive queries in this comparison but I wanted
to show just how great the difference can be when you don't limit your
result set.  Making a similar table comparing naive vs. scoped might
be useful as well but I leave it as an exercise to the reader.

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Stat</th>
    <th>Naive (I)</th>
    <th>Naive</th>
    <th>Scoped (I)</th>
    <th>Scoped</th>
  </tr>
  
  <tr>
    <td>Thru</td>
    <td>6x</td>
    <td>4x</td>
    <td>5x</td>
    <td>3x</td>
  </tr>

  <tr>
    <td>99.9%</td>
    <td>20x</td>
    <td>11x</td>
    <td>13x</td>
    <td>8x</td>
  </tr>

  <tr>
    <td>Avg</td>
    <td>32x</td>
    <td>17x</td>
    <td>21x</td>
    <td>12x</td>
  </tr>
</table>

In conclusion I've done a drive-by benchmark showing that there are
potentially great gains to be had by making use of inline fields.  I
say "potentially" because inline fields are not free and you should
take the time to understand your data-set and analyze what trade-offs
you might be making by using this feature.  In my example I'm inlining
the text field of a twitter stream so it would be useful to gather
some statistics such as what are the average number of terms per tweet
and what is the average size of each term?  Armed with that info you
then might determine how many tweets you plan to store, how many
results a typical query will match and how much extra I/O overhead
that inline field is going to add.  Finally, run your own benchmarks
on your own hardware with real data while profiling your system's I/O,
CPU, and memory usage.  Doing anything else is just pissing in the
wind.


Endnotes
----------

1: If you'd like to know more you could start by reading Distributed
Query Processing Using Partitioned Inverted Files.

2: Inline fields were added in 14.2, but my benchmarks were run
against master.

3: I like the introduction in _Effect of Inverted Index Partitioning
Schemes on Performance of Query Processing in Parallel Text Retrieval
Systems_.

4: In search parlance a word is called a _term_ and the entire list of
terms is called the _vocabulary_.

5: Or abuse, depending on your disposition.

6: Entries in an inverted index are also called _postings_ by some
people.  I know, enough with the fucking terminology already.  Shesh!

7: Or high cardinality, depending on how you want to look at it.

8: Just like when dynoing a car it's constant conditions and relative
improvement that matter.  Once you're outta the shop those absolute
numbers don't mean shit.

9: The exact commit is `3cd22741bed9b198dc52e4ddda43579266a85017`.

10: BTW, in this case "document" is a Riak object indexed by the
Search precommit hook.



[rs]: http://wiki.basho.com/Riak-Search---Schema.html#Fields-and-Field-Level-Properties

[corpus]: http://www.infochimps.com/datasets/twitter-haiti-earthquake-data
